# DeepBCR
Tumor-specific B-Cell Receptor Motif Discovery Using the DeepBCR Framework
Cynthia Chen

B-cells are a crucial part of the human immune response, as they bind to disease-causing antigens and release antibodies to target them. The complementarity determining region 3 (CDR3) is a highly-variable and diverse region on the B-cell receptor (BCR) that is able to recognize and binds to a specific set of antigens. Previously, we developed the DeepBCR framework, a multi-layer deep neural network that takes in a tumor-infiltrating BCR repertoire and predicts the possible tumor type. Trained on a comprehensive data set of 13 tumor types from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), the DeepBCR model achieved exceptional performance, signifying its ability to learn genetic patterns during its training. In this study, we aimed to extract the representative BCR motifs that DeepBCR learned by running computational analyses on DeepBCR’s outputs. We hypothesized that for each of the 13 tumor types, there would be some CDR3 motifs that recognize tumor-specific antigens. We used a series of state-of-the-art computational and statistical techniques to extract and identify these motifs. Using synthetic data, we recovered expected k-mer motifs through ranking random k-mers based on DeepBCR’s prediction scores. Using similar methods on the real TCGA data, we visualized these motifs using sequence logos, focusing on the clustering of similar motifs. Next, we computed the correlations between two DeepBCR models with altered training parameters and found that the two models learned similar BCR motifs in predicting the tumor types, indicating the high robustness in the stochastic training process. Last, we expanded the k-mer motifs into full-length CDR3s in order to validate the most promising BCRs. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to determine tumor-specific B-cell receptor motifs and uncover the genetic information learned by a neural network model trained on the TCGA dataset. Our identification of tumor-specific BCR motifs could be critical to the development of new antibody drugs for cancer treatments.

Data that is mentioned in code is not publicly available due to confidentiality. 
